Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always, Ricardo Lopez and
today I'm joined by Doctor Susie Groski. She's a
licensed doctor of physical therapy, certified pelvic rehabilitation practitioner,
and AASECT certified sexuality counselor and educator. She's also
the author of Pelvic Pain, The Ultimate Cock block,
and no bullshit guide to help you navigate through
pelvic pain. And she also has a YouTube channel.
All of that I'm leaving in the description down
below. So, Doctor Groski, welcome to the show. It's
a huge pleasure to everyone.
Thank you for having me, Ricardo.
OK, so today we're going to go through some
topics related to men's sexuality like erectile dysfunction, premature
ejaculation, delayed ejaculation, and we're also going to talk
a little bit about pelvic health. So to start
off with, let me ask you about erectile dysfunction.
So, first of all, what counts as erectile dysfunction?
How is it diagnosed basically?
Yeah. So erectile dysfunction is a persistent and consistent
inability to Achieve or maintain an erection, and it
also has to be distressing for either the individual
experiencing these changes and or for their coupleship or
their partner. I stress persistent and consistent because on
the occasion of having waxing and waning erections is
no pathology, right? So, any person with a penis
at any point in their lifetime may experience a
waxing and waning of an erection, but that doesn't
mean that they have erectile dysfunction. Now, there are
a few categories of erectile dysfunction. You have vasculogenic,
which is predominantly a blood flow issue. Then you
have a psychogenic, which is more of the mental
emotional components that can impact sexual function. Both of
which can be occurring at the same time, right?
So it's important to have a medical team that
can rule in or rule out the multiple contributing
factors to sexual dysfunction.
And, and what, what causes it basically, I mean,
what are the main factors behind erectile dysfunction?
So the biggest items that impact sexual function for
men are cardiovascular disease. Diabetes, cardio metabolic uh syndrome,
which is, you know, the increase in abdominal visceral
fat, uh, sedentary lifestyle, uh, changes within the blood
sugar levels, cardiovascular health, etc. It's just an umbrella.
Term for, hey, we're going down a path that
might not be conducive to optimal erectile function, in
addition to other other things. But the bigger, the
big two items are cardiovascular disease and, uh, diabetes.
And in fact, having persistent ongoing reduction of erectile
function. Uh, HAS been said by the literature to
be an indicator of an adverse cardiovascular event within
3 years. So it's really important to get your
heart health checked in order to preserve your heart
health.
Uh, CAN it be caused simply by aging? Is
the simple process, the simple and normal process of
aging, can it also contribute to erectile dysfunction in
any way?
Right. That's a really good point that you're bringing
up. So, in my experience, yes, that can be
a factor, right? As we age our Body changes.
And so do our, our nerves, our vasculature, the
tone of our muscles, uh, our physical ability may
change just depending on what our overall health status.
I think I'd like to stress that it's the
overall health status that is going to be a
greater indicator of sexual function. Because you do have
individuals who are in their 70s and 80s that
have no difficulty with achieving or maintaining an erection.
So I don't like to chalk it up to
age, right? Oh, it's just getting, I'm, I'm just
getting older and it's a, it's, it's, it is
what it is, because there are things to optimize
sexual function and it's not just about age, but
that can certainly be a factor.
Can it be psychogenic? I mean, are there psychological
factors that can contribute to erectile dysfunction?
Absolutely 100%, and they're often not separate from when
there is a physical issue contributing to sexual dysfunction
because it In my experience working with men. When
erectile difficulty or variance occurs, all it takes is
one time for that to be in the back
of their mind, right? Is it going to happen
this time? Am I going to be able to
have an erection? What is my partner going to
think? You know, there's so many pressures placed, I
feel, on men or people who have penises to
perform, to have a rigid heart erection 100% of
the time. And it doesn't matter what contextually is
going on in that. Since's life, because their penis
is a machine. That is a huge mistake as
far as understanding how human beings operate. And, and
the less pressure we can place on men, the
better. So yes, psychogenic factors do play a role
because the brain is the biggest sex organ when
it comes to our sexual function. It can amplify
neurochemical processes in the body, and it can also
inhibit or dampen neurochemical processes in the body. So
if we're nervous, if we're anxious about something, what
happens to our body? Our muscles constrict, vasculature, you
get vaso constriction, which we don't want in the
penis, right? We don't want the arteries to constrict,
we want them to dilate. There's a whole symphony
orchestra of events that occur in order to achieve
an erection, and if the brain perceives that there's
any potential threat, physically or emotionally, then things are
gonna go wrong. So it's important it's really important
to know the physiology of that of the erectile
process and also the ejaculatory process in order to
understand how our bodies operate, but unfortunately, traditional sex
education does not in our social, at least I
can only speak to the United States, like, that
is not something that we are educated on and
Sex is such an important part, like pooping, peeing
and sex is are vital functions to the human
existence, really. And like, no, we're not talking about
these things, we're not being educated on how these
parts of our body operate, and we don't do
that with anything else, right? We learn how to
drive a car, we learn how to walk, we
learn how to read, we learn how to do
our job, right? But the things that we rely
on every day is so stigmatized.
Well, we're doing that here today. So, um, in
one of your videos, I heard you talking about
erectile worries. So what is the difference between erectile
dysfunction and erectile worry and how can people uh
notice the difference?
Yeah, so erectile worry may also be said to,
uh, as performance anxiety, right? So I, I tend
to say worry because if there is a genuine
concern, right? If you're having sexual changes that are
really distressing for you or for your partnership, it's
normal to have some worrying. I'm trying to really
to say that is to normalize one's emotional experience
around changes with their body. So from one point
of view, having erectile worry is a normal thing
because something's different. And we don't know what's going
on, and there may have been a negative experience
around changes with their body as far as erectile
function. If it becomes persistent, consistent, and really starts
to Infiltrate their life in a way that they
start to avoid sexual activity or sexual intimacy, then
that becomes a problem, right? Because now we're using
behavioral strategies to cope with changes in their body
in a way that is maladaptive and, and, or
maybe, uh, not beneficial for them or their partner,
right? And this is a theme that I do
hear with working with men is the tendency is
to, well, if I can't For air quotes here
in this particular way, then I'd rather just not
do it at all. And that's really, you know,
I know that that is coming from perhaps anxiety
and nervousness, but the avoidant behavior only perpetuates the
problem. And it also creates a huge wedge in
between the relationship. And when, generally, when people want
to have sex, they're not having sex just to
get a hard on or to have penis vagina
sex, really. People are having sex because they want
to feel close and connected and desired and loved
in that experience and experience mutual shared pleasure. It,
it's, it's really not about how hard the erection
is. But unfortunately, again, if we're not talking about
what's, what's going on on the inside, if we're
not having conversations around sex or, or just letting
out those worries, it can really drive a wedge
in between your own sexuality, but also with your
partner.
That that's a very interesting point. We're also going
to talk about other issues as I mentioned in
the introduction when it comes to men's sexuality here,
but do you think that apart from the important
fact that men should or People with businesses should
communicate about these issues to their doctors. Do you
think that they should also talk about them, express
them in any way to their partners? Do you
think that helps in any way?
Absolutely, 100%. Because if we're holding something on the
inside and we're nervous about it, our tendency as
humans is to think over and over and over
about it, feeling very isolated and siloed. We're already
in a culture that Has messages or portrays these
messages that men should be, uh, uh, you know,
this man up term or be able to be
independent and regulate their emotions, uh, and not share
emotion because that is a sign of weakness or
vulnerability. Uh, THAT is, again, an unfortunate type of
messaging because it really just creates Isolation, loneliness, and
feeling siloed with very common experiences that all that
all men at some point in their life will
experience. And that's where more fear and anxiety will
stem from because we're You know, if I, if
I, you know, let's say, hit my thumb on
my car door, or like, you know, hit my
elbow somewhere and my funny bone starts to make
it feel, we know that. Why? Because we know
other people experience it. I can talk to my
friend. I can say, hey, I, you know, my
elbow hurts or I've got this thing going on,
and they're sharing their experiences, and then that kind
of normalizes and our brain kind of calms down.
So like, oh, I'm not alone. Oh, this is
normal or this is common. Oh, there's hope for
that. For sexual dysfunction, for sexual pain, for anything
pooping, peeing and sex for men. Where's the conversation?
There's no conversation. There, there, there's no conversation. So
they're left in the dark with these symptoms that
are very distressing, without the education, without the knowledge,
and also without feeling empowered to do something about
it. That's the problem. So yes, I do think
communication is, is very important to your point about
medical providers and to their partners. There was a
very, it's an oldie but a goodie from like
1995 or 1997, don't quote me on the year
of this survey, it was a US poll of
500 individuals, men and women, and they were asked
the question. Would you, how comfortable, you know, would
you feel comfortable addressing sexual health concerns with your,
with your medical provider? Over 70% of them said
no, that they would not ask their provider related,
you know, to, to, to sexual health and for
one of the reasons feeling that they, that no
one would be able to help them. Or that
they would make their doctor embarrassed, and they didn't
want to embarrass their doctor. But we do know
from the literature that patients, individuals, people want their
providers to ask them questions around sexual health. Why?
Because that's an invitation to say, hey, let's talk
about sex. Sexual health is important, just like your
physical health, your emotional health, your spiritual health. All
of these four pillars are aspects to you as
a whole human being that are important. Let's talk
about it. And then that invitation gives that person
permission to share what's been there on their heart
and mind. And then get help for their shoes.
Now related to their, you know, communicating with their
partner, of course, because here's the thing, we start
acting differently, we start acting weird when something is
wrong, our behavior is, is different, and only because
those are protecting mechanisms, not because you're inherently weird
or like trying to do this on purpose, but
because you're afraid. There's fear underneath that, there's fear
of rejection, there's fear of being judged. There's there's
fear of of How our partners is going to
react. You know, all those things, there's fear of
losing a partner. And that's when we start to
distance ourselves from the relationship again, only creating this
wedge in between the relationship and what does the
partner do? The partner starts to notice immediately, because
who's the one that knows us like the back
of our hand, the person we live with day
in and day out, who we know how to
press buttons, you know? You know, it's the person
that we get the most irritated with. It's because
we love each other. You're with each other all
the time, but that also Means that whenever our
behavior starts to change, we know, you know, what's
going on. And then we're not gonna, you know,
the partner feels a little apprehensive sometimes to ask.
And then we're in our brain trying to fill
in the blanks. What does our brain do? Make
terrible assumptions about what's going on. And then here
you go. We've got more separation, more tension, more
resentment, more distance. So, as the number one skill
to have with any sexual dysfunction, is to embrace
practicing communication skills, no matter how difficult it is,
no matter how vulnerable and scary it is. Of
course, the first time when you try something new,
you're going to fumble through it. It's not going
to be perfect. It's just share what's been on
your heart, you know, share that, this is scary
for me to say, but I need to say
it because I want you to be my erotic
friend and ally. You are my erotic friend and
ally.
Great. So uh let me ask you now about
premature ejaculation. So first of all, what counts as
such, what is premature ejaculation, what is, let's say
the normal duration of intercourse?
Yes, so the normal duration of intercourse is approximately
5 to 7 minutes. That's the average. And, and
when I say intercourse, it's the research is around
vaginal intercourse. So, so intravaginal time to ejaculation, approximately
5 to 7 minutes. Now, do you have a
wide spectrum of time? Of course you do. Of
course you do. Those are not hard and fast
time markers or time stamps to hold firmly around.
Now, with early ejaculation, also known as premature ejaculation,
According to literature, it's less than 1 to 2
minutes with, again, vaginal uh penetration. OK. That doesn't
mean, though, that this isn't distressing for someone who
feels like they, their body just does body things,
and they don't feel like they have a say
so in that conversation. So that could be outside
of vaginal or anal intercourse. That could be with
masturbation, that could be with any type of touch.
It doesn't have to be with intercourse. Whenever the
person feels distressed, worried, again, same thing with erectile
dysfunction, if it's persistent, consistent and distressing for the
person and or their partner, then it becomes an
issue. But here's the thing, again, there are different
level gradients of arousal. And that is going to
fluctuate based on context, how horny you are. When
was the last time you had sex? What's the
visual, visual, all the sensory cues, visual, smell, auditory,
you know, is this a new partner? Is this
a partner you've been with for for a while?
Has this been going on all your life? And
that would be more of a, um, Uh, not
acquired premature ejaculation, but, um, a lifelong premature ejaculation,
right? So it just depends, but I say again,
it's multifactorial, the, the contributing factors to ejaculatory um.
Function.
Mhm. Uh, BUT what are the main causes? I
mean, either for, uh, I mean, I would imagine
that perhaps there are different causes for lifelong premature
ejaculation and the, the other kind of e premature
ejaculation you mentioned there, but what are the main
causes really?
Yeah, this is a good one because we really
don't have conclusive evidence around what might be the
causes. Uh, THERE are some potential theories around like
hormones. Uh, THERE'S also uh theories around medication withdrawal,
like if, especially if you're coming off of like
opioid medications or recreational drugs. And there's also talk
around just inherent Sensitivity, so having your own genetics
and neural wiring that just makes this area a
little bit more sensitive for physically in that area
and also in our brains. There's also, uh, some
literature around having diabetes that can also contribute to
premature ejaculation. Um, AND also some literature around pelvic
floor. Function and pelvic floor tension. So, I'll have
a visual aid if I may. This is more
of my wheelhouse here, just to orient the audience.
So we're talking about the pelvic floor, it's everything
in between your butt bones. And you have a
few layers of muscles here. You have superficial layers
that look like a triangle that are wrapped around
the penis. You have the external anal sphincter, and
then you have the deep pelvic floor muscles that
essentially live in the bottom of the bowl and
support all the organs, your bladder, your prostate, and
your rectum, and they're like a sling like a
hammock arrangement on the inside. For the purposes of
of ejaculation function, these muscles are important players. Isiocavernosis,
bulbo spongyiosis, and transverse perineal muscles, and their nerves,
they communicate with, they attach to and support the
bulb of the penis, but their function is to
contract and relax, contract and relax during ejaculation. Their
function is also to assist in erection. So Ere
erectile dysfunction or sexual dysfunction and or ejaculation issues,
we're interested about what's going on here and what
the function is, and the muscle nerve communication here,
because that plays a role as far as messages
going to the spinal cord in your brain. Now,
if someone has like, Unknown or involuntary habitual tension,
you know, in this area, or maybe they're having
weakness in this area. That's where a pelvic floor
physical therapist comes in because we're assessing the actual
mus muscle nerve, uh, communication and function. In relation
to ejaculation and erection. So, we will work on
coordination and communication. So in pelvic floor therapy, what
we are most focused on working on is pelvic
floor coordination and muscle nerve communication. We also tie
that to if, if the therapist has sexuality, counseling
or education as a background like myself, then I
couple that with specific training related to arousal. Arousal.
So, allowing them to do lower back and pelvic
movements that perhaps mimic movements that they might be
in during sexual activity, and also talking about Masturbation
techniques. Part of the, so this could be part
of acquired or lifelong habits around how you're stimulating
your penis. In general, again, I totally do not
have a penis. However, I have worked with hundreds
and hundreds of penises. And the theme that I'm
noticing around often ejaculatory issues or early ejaculation. Is
that they, their penis is used to a particular
stimulation. With their hand Fast, hard, quick, really to
just get it to get it done, right? There
isn't this like, uh, ritual around like taking it
slow, touching their body, allowing themselves to feel their
arousing arousal gradients. You know, generally, when, uh, men
are Exploring their bodies, or, you know, think about
growing up. You're doing it in secret, you're trying
to hurry up. Maybe you're in the bathroom, you
got a house full of family, you know, you're
like, I don't have time, I don't wanna, I
don't wanna get caught. You know, there's all these
things, and so how the penis gets stimulated is
how the penis then learns to respond with ejaculation.
And that that can be the issue as well,
or having a firmer grip or etc. ETC. So
part of the process of learning a different way
or learning to enhance or expand your sexual pleasure,
is to really slow down. To talk about what
your techniques, what you've been doing, and maybe do
things a little differently. And that includes like using
lubricant maybe during masturbation. I know I'm probably stepping
ahead to like techniques and things, but this is
all part of the process of helping the body
adapt to stimulation in varying ways that are going
to allow you to enhance your sexual pleasure, rather
than, you know, curtail your sexual pleasure. But on
top of that, psychologically, just like with erectile dysfunction,
If you're again, if you're nervous about it, if
you're worried about it, if you're um trying really
hard, like squeezing all of your muscles, you know,
remember I just talked about these muscles. If you're
tense here, that's only going to contribute to what
do these muscles do when they ejaculate, squeeze like
a squeeze like a we're tense, that can trigger
the ejaculatory reflex because you're trying so hard to
not come, to not ejaculate, that it's actually making
it worse. So what we tried to do is
create relaxation, work with breathing techniques, slowing down. I'm
not a fan of, sometimes you'll hear like um
The squeeze technique for e for ejaculatory, uh, or
premature ejaculation where you squeeze the glands to stop
from ejaculation cause it's like, you know, reflex and
it's tells the spinal cord no, and what have
you. But again, that disrupts the erotic flow. It's
perpetuating the message that something's wrong with you, or
the technique around start and stop, right? I know
the intention is, is well, right? It's, it's, you
know, stop, pause, but really it should be just
Shift, right? You're it's all about awareness. Notice where
your arousal gradients are in the moment and just
shift a little bit. Shift a little bit to
dial it back down. But if you abruptly start,
stop, you know, it's again too mechanical, you're in
your head. It further perpetuates this thing about, there's
something wrong with me, and, and that's not what
we want to continue as far as, uh, helping
someone with their sexual dysfunction and distress. And that
also includes having conversations with their partner or partners
around where the distress is coming from. How else
can you, uh, Enhance your sexual experience without uh
feeling disappointed or blaming your partner or what have
you. Uh YEAH.
Right. So, uh, I mean, about the pelvic floor,
we will probably have time to go back to
that and talk also about pelvic pain a little
bit. But we've talked about premature ejaculation. What about
delayed ejaculation? What is it and what causes it?
Yes, again, very interesting. Delayed ejaculation is the inability,
again, persistent and consistent inability to To or to
ejaculate or orgasm. Now, orgasm and ejaculation are not
the same thing. Ejaculation is a reflex driven by
uh spinal cord reflexes, the sympathetic nervous system. So
for erectile dysfunction, it's, in order to get an
erection, we have to be in that state of
feeling relaxed and calm. With ejaculation, it flips the
switch to the default of adrenaline, fast, hard, heart
rate increases that fight, flight or fawn mechanism, to
put it simply. So with delayed ejaculation, It's the
inability to uh ejaculate. Now, certainly, if someone had
prostate cancer treatment that disrupted the neurovascular connection to
the penis, that could be one of the causes,
or if they had their prostate removed, they're gonna
have a dry ejaculate. Let's say they're on certain
medications for enlarged prostate. That could also cause retrograde
ejaculation, which is ejaculate fluid goes back up into
the bladder instead of coming out or the volume
might be lower. So those are like physical causes
that potentially might contribute to that. Other causes are
being distracted, OK? During sex, feeling bored during sex.
Again, it goes back to that awareness piece of
arousal triggers, like, Are we doing the same thing
over and over again? Maybe that's gonna take a
little longer to to come. And as as men
get older, just like any other part of the
body, nerves get a little sluggish. They do. So
you may need a little support to stimulate these
nerve endings differently. And that's where we talk about
like using vibrators, using lubricants, stimulating gels, uh, using
visual cues in different ways, auditory and Uh, auditory
and other senses, you know, changing it up a
bit because we're humans, we love routine, and we
often tend to do the same things over and
over again, and it loses its luster after a
while. I do also want to make note of
when I say distraction. You know, if you're finding
yourself just scrolling porn, and like, because again, porn
is not inherently bad nor good in any way.
It's, it's just a tool. But if you're finding
yourself just stimulating your penis and scrolling, you know,
and trying to find, you know, that one thing
and you're just scrolling, scrolling, scrolling, try to stimulate.
I mean, before you know it, you know, you're
45 minutes into it and nothing's happening. So we
don't wanna, we don't wanna train our bodies in
that way either. So maybe taking breaks and using
your own internal imagination, not being distracted perhaps by
an external stimulus, but again, bringing it back into
the body, embodying your experience, feeling pleasure, and, and
changing things up, you. You know, in different ways.
So, uh, and, and medication as well can, you
know, medication also can be a contributing factor. Um,
THINGS like, uh, anxiety medications, for example, might be
one of them as well. Uh, THERE'S, there's many
others, but not necessarily my wheelhouse pharmaceuticals anyway, but
yeah. Yeah.
So this one I really have to ask you
about because it's a very common anxiety among men.
What is normal penis size?
Yeah, so this is a question as well. Yeah,
on average, an erect penis can be anywhere from
5 to 6 inches. Uh, I think flaccid, don't
quote me on this, maybe somewhere between 3, 3.5
to 4 perhaps. Here's the thing about penis size.
There's no standard protocol on how to measure. So
when you're looking at these research papers, they're kind
of all over the place as far as how
the researchers chose to measure a penis, right? The
other thing that research doesn't include is Mental stimulation,
right? They, you may, they, they may be, it's
a, it's a research paper. So you're kind of
going into a lab. They may synthetically give you
an erection, or have you get your own erection,
but context matters as far as how hard and
how pleasurable things are. So we have to think
about that from that perspective of like, This research
is not taking into account all the factors that
contribute to penile stimulation and function when we're, when
things are being measured. And the other thing is
we have no data pool set from like, you
know, it's not like they're taking all the men
on this planet. Then making that conclusion that this
is the average, you know, the data pool set
is very small amount, uh, you know, 20 people,
sometimes 50, maybe 100, 200, but that's very, that's
very, very small sample data set. So penises come
in all different shapes and size, just like vulvas,
you know, lips, labia, clitoris. Scrotums and penises do
come in different sizes and shapes and curvatures, etc.
AND I'd like to normalize that for people. And
there is this really good research by Dr. Nicole
Prousey, I believe it's from 2023, I'm not mistaken,
but they did do a study, a survey study,
a qualitative qualitative study around what do women prefer?
And what do, what do women like as far
as penis sizes? And what they found was women
in long term relationships. Really didn't, they, they didn't,
they didn't really care about how big the, the
size of the penis was, girth or lengthwise, because
it was the emotional connection that mattered the most,
and they had very, you know, highly positive sexual
experiences. There was some note about those that are
in casual sexual or recreational sex. Uh, PREFERRING, uh,
greater girth than length, and that makes sense, uh,
A, because it's just casual sex. There's generally no,
none of that emotional entanglement. Um, IT'S more of
the physical sensation and pleasure aspect of things, perhaps.
Um, AND the girth, when we're talking about vaginas,
like during intercourse, vaginal, uh, stimulation is more pressure
sensors in there. So it's not length, it's pressure
sensors. And again, It was a small set, a
small set of individuals. But the preferred, you know,
the preferred, uh, was not too big, not too
small, and the emotional connection, uh, in, in couple
ships for sure. So, again, taking the pressure off
of men around their penis size, because here's the
thing too, you're born with what you have. You,
you got with what you're, what you're born with.
And why go to these great lengths to try
to augment or change or, um, Yeah, I guess
not just being accepting more and loving yourself and
and feeling and being confident in that because sex
isn't just about your penis. Yeah,
and the semen volume matter, is that something that
men should worry about?
So semen volume fluctuates, uh, fluctuates tremendously based on
what you're eating and drinking, how old you are.
And also your pelvic floor function, uh, volume as
far as, um, the actual, uh, measurement of, of
how much, you know, a teaspoon or what have
you, the actual volume of semen. But I would
find, I would say that that may be distressing
anecdotally, as far as what I see in the
office. That may be a distressing component, but what's
further distressing is the force of ejaculation. So what's
distressing is that if it seeps out or dribbles
out and doesn't like shoot out or have a
little force or gumption behind it, That's a little
distress. That's more distressing than the actual volume for
men. I would, again, this is anecdotally in what
I hear as far as in my office working
with men. And we go back to the pelvic
floor muscles, right? Because what are those muscles, little
pop quiz? What are the muscles that Aid in
ejaculation and expelling fluid out of the penis, these
muscles. So as, you know, a person ages, we
want to make sure that these muscles have great
coordination and also strength to help, you know, move
fluid out of the body. So that, that would
be my two points to your question.
And are there ways of increasing semen volume?
Oh, this is a good question for a nutritionist,
Doctor Jason. Because he actually, he had a, we
had a podcast with him. It's actually on my
YouTube channel, optimizing your erectile function, but briefly fluid
intake. Drink water, y'all like fluid intake because semen
is dependent on, like, it's your blood flow, your
body, your cellular makeup is, is fluid, right? It's,
there's water. So drink water, uh, for sure, uh,
and eating your healthy, you know, your leafy greens.
So I, I, without overstepping my boundaries in that
aspect, I would say drink plenty of water, eat
leafy greens, but don't drink too much water where
your pee is clear and you don't know the
distinction between toilet water and your pee water because
you might be then dealing with like urinary urgency
and frequency. So, you know, healthy balance, right? Light
light lemonade color, good.
So let me ask you about another thing that
might affect men. What can cause pain during erection
and ejaculation?
Yes. You're hitting all the yummy questions for me
today. Love this question. So what can contribute to
erectile pain and ejaculatory pain? Remember these muscles, remember
these nerves. Couple of neuroanatomy points here. You have
the pudendal nerve is is a nerve that comes
from Several sacral spinal roots, S2, 3, and 4.
So this is the end of the spine. I
like to think about it as S2, 3 and
4 keeps your poop and pee off the floor.
Why? These nerves are what supply and innervate function
to these muscles, organs, and genitals. So, there's a
branch of this nerve, several branches on either side.
So this model doesn't include the yellow or the
nerves, but the model doesn't include all of them.
This is a, think of this as a like
a a spider web here cause there's so many
connections. This nerve will give off perineal nerves and
the dorsal nerve of the penis, which I'm gonna
show you right here. It's on either side, and
this nerve branches into several different uh mini branches
to give off uh to supply the whole shaft,
the urethra, which is the tube. That empties the
bladder and to the head and the glands of
the penis. But you can see that it's traveling,
you know, it's gonna travel in between all this
tissue and the erectile tissue and exit from right,
this is the pubic synthesis area where your lower
belly, like where that penis attached, you know, kind
of meets the body, it's exiting through there. Now,
during ejaculation or erectile pain, it can be an
issue where these nerves are aggravated. Either there there's
just too overstimulation, aggravation, or an injury. Joking, maybe
your audience knows this, maybe not, but joking is
something that I do not suggest men do with
obviously. Do what would you like with your body.
The issues with joking, and let me explain what
it is. Joking is a technique that Has been
said to with an erect penis or partial or
Partial or erect penis, you you squeeze the blood
from the base and move it up to the,
to the glands. So you have an erect penis,
a lot of blood flow, a lot of pressure,
and you're adding more pressure and, and moving that
blood flow into the penis. The idea there is
that it will quote in air enlarge your penis.
It will not, it will not. What I see
is that it causes more injury, cause these tissues
in your penis are susceptible to injury, just like
any other part of your body. So if you're
doing something that your body or your tissues are
not able to adapt to because it's too quick,
too soon, too hard, You sustain an injury, and
what that injury looks like is either a pelvic
floor muscle strain and or a nerve injury. Nerve
tissue is like any other tissue in the body.
So they might feel something like a zing, zap,
tingling, like weird sensations. They might actually also not
be able to get an erection as consistently as
they want. Maybe they'll feel temperature changes. There's all
sorts of things that can happen when there's an
injury here. So, You know, again, all recoverable, all
that to say, all of that is recoverable, especially
pelvic floor therapy is super helpful for this, to
help calm things down and then build back up
tissue tolerance. Again, just like you would if you
broke your foot or you know, sprained a strained
a hamstring or something, you know, we have to
address the, the Uh, tissue tolerance, and we have
to also address function and, and so forth and
so on. But it's educating people on what's going
on here that helps to calm that down. So,
that's what I see in my office often is
either a muscle issue, muscle and or nerve issue.
It's never separate because nerves communicate with muscles and
tell them what to do. And I'll also say,
The brain comes into here too, right? Because all
these nerves, all they do is just send messages
up to the spinal cord and then to your
brain, and then your brain makes sense of that
information. Like, touch around this area isn't interpreted by
these nerves here. It's a conscious experience that has
is generated by multiple areas of the brain and,
and consciousness that allows that interpretation of whatever these
sensory messages are. But I'll tell you what, as
soon as something feels weird down here and new
and different, This area is like, your brain is
like, whoa, like a Velcro, you know, like, what's
going on here? Is this good? Am I protective
data? And then again, the psychological components can actually
amplify uh pain sensitivity in this area and contribute
to a vicious cycle. So we do want to
address in erectile pain and ejaculatory pain, both the
physical aspects, the tissue aspects, you know, uh, Training
the the body to be less protective here and
also training, not training, but helping the brain receive
messages that you're safe and that you can regain
your body confidence through experiential new learning. Like, oh,
sex doesn't have to hurt, and we may need
to adjust like masturbation, or we may have to
adjust like positions for intercourse or What have you.
Like, that's fine in the beginning, just like you
would adjust your exercise routine, right? You don't keep
lifting, deadlifting at the same level. No. You cut
back a little bit, maybe you take a rest,
but we get back to building. And so that's
again, where us pelvic therapists come in to help
with that. Um, BUT that those would be my,
from my perspective and scope of practice as a
physical therapist. Some of the reasons for, uh, erection
or erectile pain, direct injury, again, we, you know,
sports, etc. um. Uh, RECREATIONAL activities. It could also,
I will say, another part of this puzzle is
your spine, because many of these nerves, as I
mentioned, are coming from this lower area, but also
the lumbar, which is the, the stack of vertebrae
that live here. Those also supply the genital area.
So again, we're just kind of ruling out what
are the contributing factors to why there might be
a more activity and more messages. Coming from here,
um, and we just calm, we calm shit down
and build shit back up thanks to Greg Lehman
for that one. BUT yeah, that's kind of the
idea there.
So, before we get into the last topic of
our conversation today, which is going to be about
pelvic pain, let me just ask you one more
question. Can the digestive system also influence sexual performance?
And if so, how?
Oh wow, again, such a great, you're gonna have
to invite Doctor Jason Stevens on here who is
a doctor of nutrition. Because he will be able
to answer that a lot better than I can.
There is, I, well, I will say is a
broad answer here, yes, 100%. Because of the visceral,
somatic crosstalk or, uh, conversations that can occur, right?
So here's the bowl of the pelvis. You've got
your, your genital organs in here. Let me just
open this up real quick for the audience. Don't
try this at home. We bladder, prostate, and rectum.
The rectum, part of the digestive system, right? So,
these muscles here are supporting function, adaptation, pressure demands,
etc. There, these muscles aid in Letting poo and
pee out when you want it to, and keeping
poo and pee in when you want to. If
that's not happening, there's a problem, right? It may,
you know, again, this whole thing about, oh, I'm
aging and incontinence or fecal incontinence, like bowel incontinence.
Oh, that's probably nor, no, no, not normal, maybe
common, but not normal. So anything that's going to
disrupt. The Balance in this area is, is potentially
going to create a little bit of, of trouble.
Now, the rectum is connected to the whole bowel
system that sits in your belly, uh, your small
intestine, etc. But yes, like having irritable bowel disease,
irritable bowel syndrome, um, Crohn's disease, things like that,
all the nerves that communicate with your guts. Also
have conversations with your pelvic floor and vice versa.
So there is, there is definitely a correlation, not
a causation, right? Not 1 to 1 direct causation,
but we do know from the literature that there
is a correlation between your digestive system and pelvic
floor function. In addition to your gut has a
huge influence on your immune system, like your gut
microbiome, the bacteria in your gut, etc. All of
that is going to contribute to the balance of
the ecosystem here. Right.
So let's talk then about pelvic pain. First of
all, what is pelvic pain? What causes
it? Yeah, so pelvic pain is the, so it's
pain in the pelvic region. I it's pelvic region,
meaning abdominal, genitals, or anywhere in between your bones
or the sacral area that is persisting or lasting
longer than 3 to 6 months without a known
cause or pathology. So what does that mean? No
infection, no cancer, no other, no other medical diagnostics
are able to Have a reasonable explanation for why
you're, you're having pain down here, OK? Once that's
all ruled out, and this again is persistent, then
we're dealing with chronic pelvic pain syndrome. That is
an umbrella term for any type of pain that
you actually might experience down here, to be honest
with you. Erectile pain that we talked about, ejaculatory
pain that we talked about, tailbone pain, butt pain,
uh, pain with intercourse pain. With bowel movements, rectally
or vaginally, uh, pain, scrotal pain could, could, is
falling under that as well. Lower abdominal pain, uh,
feeling fullness in the pelvic area, um, all of
that can fall under chronic pelvic pain syndrome. Also,
prostate pain. So prostate pain, which has its own
term, it's called prostate pain, provoked prostate pain syndrome.
Um, Again, no known cause or or pathology, so
there's no prosthetic infection. A little disclaimer here about
Terminology. Historically, the prostate has been blamed for for
pelvic pain in men all like prostatitis. Doctor, you've
got prostatitis. Here's the course of antibiotics. You'll be
good to go. All right, cool. Take the course
of antibiotics. I don't have pain, doc. What's going
on? All right, take another course of antibiotics, but
there's no known infection, right? And really no one's
really In my experience with men, they're not really
even getting tested for prostate infection. It's just an
assumption because it's just It's just the thing that
happens. Anyway, so they're on 2nd course of antibiotics,
3rd course of antibiotics, sometimes 4th course of antibiotics.
It's still not helping. We are missing the boat,
y'all. Like, it is not an infection. 95% to
97% of cases are not related to a prostate
infection. That it needs to be knowledge in the
community. Like, if you had tried a course of
antibiotics once and it didn't work, go see a
pelvic therapist. That's the, that's where we should go,
right? Because the longer that this persists, The better
that these pain systems get at protecting you. It's
like learning to ride a bike or driving a
car. The more you do it on repeat, the
easier it gets for you to do it, and
you could just do it without thinking, right? It's
very important to educate, retrain, equip the person, help
them feel empowered to do something about it, rather
than going down the rabbit hole of unnecessary medical
tests and exams, which are often very invasive and
uncomfortable. So, It's not prostatitis, but you can have
prostate pain. So that's why I mentioned that because
you can have prostate pain without an infection. And
again, we address that with pelvic therapy. All these
muscles are, are, are connected here and even doing
some prostate manual therapy, right? This prostate gland. Has
several, several hundreds, hundreds, little, little tubules, lots of
little pockets of fluid is there. And sometimes, again,
uh, maybe it was uh an injury, maybe it
was just benign. Sometimes there is an infection, but
then after you take the course of antibiotics and
the infection's gone, you're still in pain, right? Because
the immune system has learned to be very sensitive
and very protective. It's not that there's an infection
still there, it's just that There's pain system hypersensitivity
that's going on, and that includes your nerves and
your immune system. So, you know, again, it's a
whole person approach, how we address uh persistent pain
uh in the pelvis, and it, it, it really
does encompass like a deep understanding and knowledge of
what's going on and how your body works. Resetting
and reconnecting with your body, right? Like brain-body strategies,
which are super important because they, they then kind
of refine the message. You get messages of like,
oh, I can do this, and that doesn't hurt,
and, oh, it's getting better. It's like, oh, OK.
It's like when you can see your thumb, you
know, it's like red, you maybe you have a
cut. You're not really worried about it cause you
can touch. And feel it, and it's working and
everything's fine, right? But it hurts and it's healing.
It's like the same thing that we're trying to
do here. And then this other thing that we're
trying to do is movement and loading, right? As
part of that process is like, get them back
to doing their activities, which also includes sex, right?
Cause when you have pelvic pain, when there's this
chronic pelvic pain, this headache in your pelvis, You
don't want to have sexy time? You're like, that's
the last thing. I, I don't want to touch
that thing. Uh uh. No, because why? There's a
lack of understanding of why you hurt. If, if
you think that every time you have sex and
it hurts, or every time you do this particular
activity, you think I'm making it worse. I'm injuring
myself more. I'm having more damage. No, no, no,
no, no, my friends. No. It just means there's
sensitivity there, like a sunburn. You get sunburn on
your back, you go in the shower, you turn
on the warm, it's warm water, and you're like,
Yeah. You don't think your back is burning more,
do you? No, no. It's sensitive, but it's not
like the sunburn is getting worse. You're not causing
more damage or harm with warm water on your
back. That's what we're dealing with here. And it's
a whole process of reintegrating, reconnecting, loading and moving
and getting that person back to function. And the
goals are related to pooping, peeing, sex, and whatever
else activity, work, and otherwise that we want to
get back to.
Mhm. So in terms of the sexual consequences of
pelvic pain, it has to do with the fact
that uh people who have it just avoid having
sex because it causes pain, is that
it? Yes, yes, right, cause if something hurts in
wherever in your body, right? What do you do?
You're a little apprehensive to do that thing that
makes it hurt, right? And you're like, unless you're
into that. Now, that is, that can be kinky
for someone and there is pain play. Like people
literally love, like, having a little bit of that,
that, that noxious stimulus, like that painful experience, but
that's wanted. That's the difference. This is like an
invasion of your privacy. Like, you're like, what is
going on here? I'm feeling this pain. I do
not want this. This is not pleasurable. And for
a person who's known their body in this way
that feels pleasurable, right? With themselves or mutually with
a partner and now doesn't, that's very destabilizing and
disorienting and scary. So when that's happening, guess what?
Erections are going to be difficult, desire and libido.
But that's normal in response to a perceived and
or a direct threat, right? Mhm.
Great. So, uh, I mean, I've already mentioned your
YouTube channel in the introduction. Where else can people
find you and your work on the internet?
Yes, so thank you for asking. Shameless plug here.
I have a Patreon, uh site. It's uh patreon.com/doctor
Suzie G D R S U S I E
G. AND there we have live model demonstrations and
tutorials of scrotal mobilization, uh, techniques for penile pain,
uh, techniques for how to use a pelvic one,
and, and even how I would do a pelvic
exam, right? So to help destigmatize the process of
asking for help for a lot of men, and
when they have a community. And this, let me
tell you, this community is so amazing because they're
sharing their experiences, such heartfelt experiences sexually with pain
and building camaraderie. Like, this is a community that
helps elevate the voices of men who are experiencing.
Experiencing pelvic pain and or sexual dysfunction. It is
a beautiful community. I did not think that it
was going to take off the way it did.
And so I am just so honored to hold
this space for people and get to know people
in this way. So yes, Patreon, Doctor Susie G.
Great. So thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a very fun and also very informative conversation.
You're very welcome, Ricardo. Thanks for having me.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larson, Jerry Mullerns, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs Colin Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal Herzognun
Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David Sloan
Wilson, Asila dearraujuru and roach Diego Londono Correa. Yannick
Punterrumani Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary
Galman Samovallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti Gabrielon Corteseus Slelitsky,
Scott Zacharyishim Duffyani Smith Jen Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William
Buckner, Paul Georgianeau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson,
Peter Vozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray,
Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Corale Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry
D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then
Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix,
Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van
Goller, Alexander Hubbert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Net. A special thanks
to my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas
Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni
Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers
Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.